---
layout: post
title: Waking Up
author: Tanner
subtitle: "On Sam Harris' eponymous book and the illusion of self"
---

I read Sam Harris' [Waking Up](http://www.amazon.com/Waking-Up-Spirituality-Without-Religion/dp/1451636016/) this summer. It's an interesting book, the kind that's hard to digest on first past, though perhaps not in a way that invites rumination. His thesis is that the idea of "self," this entity that sits behind your eyes, is an illusion: just a filter that we use to make sense of the world. It's a very weird idea, one that's difficult to define, much less explain. That's apparent in the book - it reads a little bit like a PhD math student trying to explain his work to an elementary schooler. One gets the sense that his points are valid, but there's something missing in shared experience, common ground, that makes it difficult to take them as real.

That said, it was still a very good read, mostly due to one particular section, where he talks about the nature of consciousness. Consciousness is something that is very difficult to define, and as it stands, nobody has done a particularly good job of it. However, there's been some really interesting research into what happens when a consciousness splits. There's a neurosurgery procedure, sometimes used to treat severe epilepsy, where the two halves of the brain are divided. The lines of communication between them are cut.

The thing is, they've done experiments with these people that indicate that these people have two consciousnesses in the same body. Each half of the brain has enough there to be an independent entity. This wouldn't be apparent from the outset - one half of the brain ends up being dominant, and driving most of the speech and movement, so tt takes some contriving for this to manifest. The experiments involved laying out a bunch of objects in front of the person, and then obscuring their vision in such a way that each eye (which only reports to the corresponding side of the brain) can only see half of the objects. The researchers then asked the person to pick up a particular object. Both sides of the brain were able to do this - and the weirdest part was that when the non-dominant side of the brain responded, the dominant side of the brain got flustered and quickly rationalized as to why they were able to pick up an object that they couldn't see.

What is consciousness, then? It's not down to the experience of a brain if you can divide a brain and get two consciousnesses. In the case of those split-brain people, the primary consciousness isn't even completely aware of the secondary consciousness. Which one of those consciousnesses houses the person's "self?" Do normal people have multiple consciousnesses? Multiple levels of consciousness? It's amazing to me that we have so little knowledge of how our brains work, and even less of how our minds work. It's also a weird thing that those two things are distinct.